Google's new AI features are quietly
stealing the most valuable moment in
search right when customers are ready to
decide. Here's what no one's saying. You
can rank on page one and still lose.
Why? Because if your brand isn't being
cited in those AI generated results,
you're invisible. You're not in the
conversation. Google is no longer just a
list of links. It's a curated answer
engine. And those answers, they're being
pulled from content the algorithm
trusts. So, this isn't just SEO anymore.
This is about training the AI to
recognize your brand as a source. It's
called GEO, generative engine
optimization. And if you understand how
to reverse engineer it, you'll not only
own visibility, you'll build brand
authority while your competitors panic
about traffic drops. My name is Neil
Patel, and for the last two decades,
I've helped companies big and small turn
Google into a machine for traffic and
revenue. In this video, I'm going to
show you how Google's AI overviews and
AI mode work with real data, real tools,
and the exact strategy we're using right
now with thousands of clients to grow
their business with Google's new AI
layer.
Most people think Google's AI features
are shrinking traffic and that's killing
SEO, but that's the wrong way to look at
it. So, what's actually happening?
Google is becoming more like Chat GBT,
and people are typing in full-blown
questions more than ever. In fact,
questionbased searches have exploded
from 38% to 87% in just 8 months. Why
did this spike? Because these AI
features are making Google way more
useful. Consumers have gotten a lot more
sophisticated since Chat GPT hit the
scene. They're not typing in basic
keywords anymore. They're asking real
questions and expecting full answers
right on the search page. But here's the
bigger shift no one's talking about.
Daily Google searches have jumped from
8.5 billion to 13.7 billion. That's over
5 trillion searches a year and climbing.
It's not that more people are online.
It's that they're searching more often
because Google's answers keep getting
better. So, while everyone is panicking
about losing clicks, the real
opportunity, there are more searches
than ever and more chances for your
brand to be seen if you know how to show
up in the new format. I'm going to start
with AI overviews because mastering
these prepares you for AI mode and
everything else Google has planned for
its AI ecosystem.
Now, here's where most marketers get it
completely wrong. They think AI overview
is taking over every search, but the
data tells a different story. Most
marketers are freaking out about AI
overview, but they haven't looked at the
data. We broke down Google's daily
search volume into four types:
informational, navigational, commercial,
and transactional. Here's what we found.
Informational searches make up nearly
50% of Google and AI overviews show up
45.9% of the time there. Commercial
searches like best CRM for agencies make
up just 14.8% of the search volume. But
AI overviews appear on 17.8% of those.
Navigational searches like Facebook
login or just HubSpot pricing make up
34.6% of all searches, but A overviews
show up on only 1.5% of those. Because
users already know where they want to
go. There's no need for the AI to step
in. And the wildest stat, transactional
searches. You know, when someone's ready
to buy, they make up only8%
of the total volume. But AI overviews
show up 6.1% of the time on those
keywords. So, what does this tell us? AI
overviews are showing up exactly where
intent is the highest when people are
researching, comparing, or about to make
a decision. If your content isn't being
pulled into those summaries, you're not
just missing on traffic, you're missing
the exact moment your customer is
choosing. This isn't about ranking
anymore. It's about becoming the source
Google's AI trust to summarize the
buying journey.
If Google's AI overviews are the
appetizer, then AI mode is a full course
meal. Most people are still trying to
wrap their head around AI overviews, but
they haven't seen what's coming with
Google's AI mode. This isn't just a
feature. It's a whole new search
experience. Here's what makes AI mode
different. It replaces the search
results page with a full-blown AI
conversation. It answers multi-part
longtail contest
instantly. It pulls from sources you
can't always see and often doesn't link
back. And it's trained to behave more
like a research assistant than a search
engine. In traditional SEO, you had
visibility and control. You could see
what people searched for, what keywords
you ranked for, what pages were showing
up. But in AI mode, you type in one
question and behind the scenes. Google
runs 10, 20, even 30 hidden sub searches
using something called query fanout
technique. Each subquery is like a
separate Google search. The AI runs
silently in the background to build its
answer. Let me show you what that really
means. Say I ask AI mode, "When is the
best time this week to schedule an
outdoor engagement photo shoot in the
Boston public garden?" That looks like
one search to you. But to the AI, it's
dozens of micro searches all stitched
together behind the scenes. It's likely
searching for Boston weather forecast
this week, best lighting for outdoor
photo shoots, Boston public garden crowd
times, photography golden hour
calculator, tips for outdoor engagement
shoots in Boston, sunset times in
Boston, June 2025. In the old Google,
you would have had to run all those
searches manually. It's like a detective
piecing it together step by step. AI
mode collapses all of that effort into
one single answer. It simulates the
behavior of a professional web surfer,
someone who knows how to dig, compare,
and synthesize before giving you a fully
researched recommendation. That's what
query fan out really means. Your initial
question is the trunk and Google
branches out into dozens of different
paths to gather the best info before
compressing it all back into one neat
authoritative response. But here's the
biggest challenge for marketers today.
You don't get a chance to see any of
those branches. You don't know what
exact queries it ran. You don't see what
pages it pulled from. You can't track
rankings the way you used to. So unless
your content shows up for those hidden
sub searches and is trusted enough to
get cited, you won't be included in the
answer at all. That's why this isn't
about ranking anymore. This is about
semantic positioning. It's not just the
words you see. It's what those words
mean in the context and how they connect
to related topics. That means it's about
training the AI to recognize your brand
as a go-to source. Not just for one
keyword, but for the entire thought
process behind the question. If you get
ahead of this before the rest of your
market wakes up, you don't just win
clicks, you win mind share. And now that
you understand how AI mode forms its
answers, let's talk about what happens
when your brand actually gets into those
answers.
SEO isn't just a conversion channel
anymore. It's a brand discovery channel.
We ran the numbers. 90% of consumers say
that the first time they ever hear about
a company is through an organic Google
result. But here's the twist. Only 5% of
those people actually buy in that
moment. So what happens to the other
14%. They bounce into your email list,
into your adfunnel, your social content,
or even back to your brand weeks later
through word of mouth. That's why I
compare modern SEO to a billboard on the
freeway or a sponsor logo on a Formula 1
car. People see you, they recognize you,
remember you, and when the timing is
right, then they buy. And here's a real
kicker. Google's AI search features site
brands the same way a news anchor sites
trusted sources. If AI drops your name
in that summary, you're suddenly front
of mind without even getting a click.
Put simply, more Google usage is more AI
overviews and AI mode results. More AI
results is more brand mentions. More
brand mentions, that's trust that
spreads everywhere else. That's why
getting cited now is the fastest way to
build long-term brand equity while
everyone else is still obsessed with
lastclick attribution. So, now that you
understand what's at stake, how can you
actually get your brand mentioned inside
these AI results?
Here's
how to reverse engineer Google's AI so
it starts citing your content. Simple.
Reverse engineer who the AI is already
pulling from. Here's how to do it step
by step. Go to neilpel.com/ubers
and enter a competitor's domain name. If
you don't know one off the top of your
head, just Google a keyword in your
niche, like best project management
tools, and grab one of the top results.
Paste that URL into Uberess and hit
search. Now you'll see a few key things.
their estimated search traffic, their
top SEO pages, their back links and
social shares pointing to those pages.
Next, scroll down and see their most
visited pages. Click view all next to
the estimated visits column. This will
show you exactly which keywords are
driving the most traffic to each page.
These are the pages Google already sees
as credible, valuable, and engaging. And
that's exactly the kind of content that
gets pulled into AI Orus. If a page is
ranking and Google's being referenced,
it's because Google trusts it. And if
you want that kind of trust, you need to
study the content that earned it.
Now, let's take it a step further and
figure out exactly where your brand is
missing out. Inside Uberess, go to the
left menu and click keyword research
similar websites. Now, plug in your own
domain name. Uberess will scan your site
and pull up a list of competing
websites. But the real gold here is the
keyword gap feature. So, what's a
keyword gap? It's a list of keywords
that your competitors are getting
traffic from, but you're not. These
keywords are prevalidated opportunities.
They're already driving traffic and
they're already working in your space.
And there's a strong chance that they're
already showing up in AI overviews and
even AI mode. So instead of guessing
what to write about, you're handed a hit
list of proven high value topics, the
ones that the algorithm already favors.
Now all you have to do is build better,
deeper, and more multimedia rich content
around each of those terms. That's how
you leap frog competitors in the AI
layer. Not by publishing more, but by
being more strategic. Remember, Google's
AI doesn't reward volume. It rewards
clarity, completeness, and credibility.
By now, you know where the opportunity
is, and you know how to find the right
keywords. So, let's talk about the part
everyone overlooks.
How do you actually create content that
gets cited by Google's AI? Here's the
trick to get your website cited by
Google's AI. Most people think it's just
about writing more blog posts. But
Google's AI isn't just scanning text
anymore. It's pulling from multi-format,
multi-layered content. Look at the
current search results and you'll start
to see a pattern. Videos are ranking,
images are ranking, even brand visuals
and explainer graphics are showing up
inside AI or views in AI mode. Why?
Because people consume visual content
faster. And Google's AI is built to
serve people what they prefer. So, if
you want to get cited, it's not enough
to just write an article. You need to
enrich the content experience. Add a
video that summarizes the key points.
Include a diagram that simplifies the
concept. Drop in an infographic that
makes the data easy to scan. Now, take
that richer content and pair it with
keyword gaps you found earlier in Uber
Suggest. That's your blueprint. That's
how you move from being just another
blog post to becoming the trusted source
the AI selects to answer the question.
And that's what transforms your content
into authority and authority into
customer demand. SEO didn't die. The
rules just changed and almost no one
noticed. While most companies are
panicking about AI and obsess over loss
traffic, the smart ones realize
something key. Google's AI features
aren't taking visibility away. They're
just redistributing it to sources Google
trusts most. And right now, there's a
narrow window where a few brands are
actually optimizing to get cited. That's
the edge. The ones who move now are
getting front row visibility in Google's
AI layer without ranking number one,
without spending on ads, and sometimes
without even being clicked. It's like a
Formula 1 card covered in logos. Most
people can't name the sponsors, but
they've seen those logos 500 times.
That's brand memory. And that's what
Google's A overviews and AI mode results
are doing for brands that show up.
You're not just playing for traffic
anymore. You're playing for recognition
because once Google's A starts citing
you, your brand sticks across search,
email, ads, social, everywhere. This is
the new top of funnel. And the longer
you wait, the harder it gets to break
in. So now you know ranking isn't
enough. If you want to win in this new
version of Google, you need to get cited
by AI. And if you want to stay ahead of
what's coming next, watch this video
next on how you can leverage AI agents
to grow your business across all your
channels.